KEY 1 : KEY TO PLANTS OF MIDDLE - EARTH 1 . Organisms microscopic , their bodies unicellular or of cell - colonies consisting of filaments , flat sheets , or globular masses 2 1 . Organisms macroscopic , their bodies multicellular and easily visible 3 2 . Cells without membrane - bound nucleus , and flagella absent ; organism not bioluminescent Cyanobacteria ( or blue - green bacteria ) . 2 . Cells with a membrane - bound nucleus , with two flagella , one in an equatorial groove around the cell , and the second attached near the first but passing down a longitudinal groove and extending behind the cell like a tail ; organism bioluminescent Seafire . 3 . Organisms growing submerged in marine habitats or floating in ocean currents Seaweeds . 3 . Organisms terrestrial or fresh - water aquatics , or growing in salt - marshes ( and thus daily flooded by tidal action ) , but not submerged in marine waters 4 4 . Leaves absent ; organisms fungi or lichens , variously colored , white to brown , yellow - green or gray - green 5 4 . Leaves present ; organisms plants , and green in color 6 5 . Organisms terrestrial , growing from the ground or on dead wood or organic material ; with branched filamentous mycelium producing mushroom - shaped reproductive bodies , each with a stalk bearing a fleshy , white to brown cap , with radiating gills on the lower surface , each gill bearing numerous spores Mushrooms . 5 . Organisms epiphytic , on tree branches , and well - branched , erect to pendent , yellow - green to gray - green ( because the fungal component of the lichen is associated with microscopic green algae ) , eventually producing cup - shaped or disk - shaped reproductive structures , each with numerous spores Beard lichens . 6 . Plant reproducing by dustlike spores , and lacking flowers , fruits , and cones 7 6 . Plant reproducing by seeds , and these borne either in cones or in fruits ( developing from flowers ) 10 7 . Plants tiny , usually only to 5 cm tall ; stems lacking vascular tissues ( i.e . , without internal water - and carbohydrate - conducting cells ) ; sporangia atop tiny , leafless stalks , each sporangium usually with a apical rim of minute teeth Mosses . 7 . Plants larger ; stems with vascular tissues ( i.e . , with internal water - conducting cells and carbohydrate - conducting cells ) ; sporangia in clusters ( sori ) on underside of leaf , and each sporangium ripped open due to action of thick - walled annulus cells 8 8 . Leaves simple and unlobed , with cordate base , with prominent midvein and obscure , pinnate , and dichotomously branched secondary veins ; with sori linear , borne along the veins , so more or less perpendicular to midvein , and protected by a lateral indusium Hart’s - tongue . 8 . Leaves compound or simple and pinnately lobed , or if simple and unlobed , then without the above combination of characters 9 . 9 . Leaves widely spaced along long - creeping rhizomes , each leaf three - times pinnately compound , and the leaflets also deeply pinnately lobed , the petiole deeply grooved on upper surface , and sporangia in elongate sori , continuous along leaf margins , and protected by inrolled leaf margin on one side and an elongated indusium on the other Bracken . 9 . Leaves without the above combination of characters Ferns ( other genera ) . 10 . Plants without flowers and producing their seeds in cones ( or terminal , naked seed surrounded by a red aril ) ; leaves needle - like to scale - like 11 10 . Plants with flowers and producing their seeds in various fruits ; leaves various , but often broad and with an evident network of veins 17 11 . Plant with seeds in cones , borne on cone scales , not associated with arils 12 11 . Plant with seeds solitary , each surrounded by a scarlet to orange - scarlet aril Yews . 12 . Plants with long and short shoots , so needlelike leaves appearing to be fascicled 13 12 . Plants with all shoots equivalent , so scalelike ; awl - shaped or needlelike leaves individually borne along stems 15 13 . Photosynthetic leaves in clusters of ( 1 – ) 2 – 5 on short shoots , the short shoots produced in a single year and eventually dropping , and thus with a set number of leaves ; leaves of two forms , needle - like and photosynthetic on short shoots ( along with sheathing , scale leaves ) and all scalelike and nonphotosynthetic on the long shoots Pines . 13 . Photosynthetic leaves in clusters of 10 , numerous on short shoots , the short shoots continuing to grow for several years , producing additional leaves ; leaves all needlelike and alike , photosynthetic on all shoots . 14 14 . Cones 1 – 5 cm long , with persistent scales ( so cone opening to release the seeds ) ; trees deciduous and wood not fragrant Larches . 14 . Cones 5 – 12.5 cm long , with deciduous scales ( so cone fragmenting at maturity , thus releasing the seeds ) ; trees evergreen and wood fragrant Cedar . 15 . Leaves needlelike , alternate , and spirally arranged ; seed cones dry at maturity , 3.5 – 20 cm long , with deciduous scales ( so cone fragmenting when mature ) ; the bract evident and free from the ovulate scale ( = cone scale ) ; seeds each with a conspicuous , single , and elongated wing ( with wing tissue derived from cone scale ) Firs . 15 . Leaves awl - shaped or scale - like , opposite and decussate or three - whorled ; seed cones dry to fleshy at maturity , 0.4 – 4 cm long , with persistent scales ( so remaining intact when mature ) ; the bract not evident , fused to the ovulate scale ( = cone scale ) ; seeds unwinged or narrowly two - winged ( with wing tissue , if present , derived from seed coat ) 16 16 . Cones dry and woody , not berrylike , eventually opening ( sometimes only after fire ) Cypress . 16 . Cones more or less fleshy , berrylike , remaining closed at maturity , and the seeds thus retained . Junipers . 17 . Plants climbing ( vines or lianas ) 18 17 . Plants not climbing ( trees , shrubs , herbs ) 28 18 . Plant climbing by means of aerial roots that emerge from along the stems ; stems with secretory canals , with an unpleasant resinous odor Ivy . 18 . Plants without aerial roots and climbing by other means ; stems without secretory canals , without a resinous odor 19 19 . Leaves opposite 20 19 . Leaves alternate 21 20 . Leaves often compound , occasionally simple ; flowers radially symmetrical , with perianth parts all alike , of distinct , petaloid tepals , numerous stamens and numerous distinct carpels ; fruits achenes Clematis . 20 . Leaves simple ; flowers bilaterally symmetrical , with a calyx and corolla , the petals fused , five stamens and two fused carpels ; fruits berries Goatleaf . 21 . Leaves pinnately compound or trifoliolate ; flowers pealike ; fruits legumes . 22 21 . Leaves simple ( or rarely palmately compound ) ; flowers various , but not pealike ; fruits capsules , achenes , drupes , or berries 23 22 . Leaves pinnately compound , with four or six leaflets , ending in a terminal , branched tendril ; stipules large , foliaceous ; seeds more or less globose Peas . 22 . Leaves trifoliolate ( i.e . , with only three leaflets ) , not ending in a tendril ; stipules very small ; seeds bean - shaped Pole beans . 23 . Petiole attachment peltate ( i.e . , away from the leaf margin ) ; flowers bilaterally symmetrical , with sepals forming a nectar spur Nasturtians , nasturtiums , Indian cresses . 23 . Petiole attachment not peltate ( i.e . , attached at the leaf margin ) ; flowers radially symmetrical , with sepals not forming a nectar spur 24 24 . Vine climbing by means of tendrils arising from the nodes 25 24 . Vine climbing by means of a twining stem . 26 25 . Tendrils arising from the stem at a point somewhat deflexed from the leaf axils ; flowers conspicuous , opening to reveal bright yellow , fused petals ; the stamens fused by their filaments ; berry developing from inferior ovary Cucumbers . 25 . Tendrils arising from the stem at a point opposite the leaves ; flowers inconspicuous , the greenish or cream - colored petals falling as a cap as flower opens ; the stamens distinct ; berry developing from superior ovary Grape vines . 26 . Leaves usually lobed , with margin serrate ; fruits achenes Hops . 26 . Leaves unlobed , with margin entire ; fruits drupes or triangular and three - winged capsules 27 27 . Flowers with six tepals ; fruits triangular and three - winged capsules ( and not hot tasting ) ; leaves lacking pellucid dots ; plants producing aerial and / or underground tubers Roots , Yams ( Dioscorea ) . 27 . Flowers lacking perianth parts ; fruits globose drupes ( and hot to the taste ) ; leaves with pellucid dots ; plants not producing tubers . Pepper . 28 . Plants woody ( i.e . , shrubs to trees ) , forming hard woody stems 29 28 . Plants herbaceous , without woody tissue See Key 2 ( flowering herbs ) 29 . Leaves opposite or whorled 30 29 . Leaves alternate 41 30 . Leaves compound 31 30 . Leaves simple 32 31 . Leaves usually pinnately compound ; flowers with only two stamens ; fruits samaras ( i.e . , each winged , with a single seed ) Ashes . 31 . Leaves palmately compound ; flowers with five stamens ; fruits thick - valved capsules ( with 1 – 3 large seeds ) . Horse - chestnuts . 32 . Leaves whorled Heath . 32 . Leaves opposite 33 33 . Flowers with inferior ovary 34 33 . Flowers with superior ovary 36 34 . Node with stipules , and these interpetiolar ( i.e . , triangular stipule placed between the petiole bases ) ; flowers with conspicuously fused petals Coffee . 34 . Node lacking stipules ; flowers with distinct petals 35 35 . Leaves evergreen , with pellucid dots ( aromatic ) ; flowers with five petals , numerous stamens ; fruit a blue - black berry Myrtle . 35 . Leaves deciduous , without pellucid dots ; flowers with four petals , four stamens ; fruit a red drupe Cornel . 36 . Flowers with distinct tepals or petals . 37 36 . Flowers with fused petals 38 37 . Perianth of sepals and petals , the sepals dimorphic ( two small and three large ) , the petals five , conspicuous , usually yellow Rockroses . 37 . Perianth of tepals , greenish , inconspicuous , and without the above combination of characters Box , boxwood . 38 . Flowers bilaterally symmetrical , the corolla of five petals , two - lipped , with two petals in an upper lip and three petals in a lower lip ; ovary deeply four - lobed ; fruits schizocarps of four nutlets 39 38 . Flowers radially symmetrical , the corolla of four petals , the lobes all the same size ; ovary more or less globose , unlobed ; fruits capsules or drupes 40 39 . Inflorescences densely spicate ( due to clustering of the pseudo - whorls of flowers ) , raised above the leafy part of the plant ; flowers purple or blue Lavender . 39 . Inflorescences not densely spicate and flowers in obvious and well - separated pseudo - whorls on distal portion of branches ; flowers white to rose or purple Thyme . 40 . Low shrub ; leaves tiny , with obscure venation and margins strongly revolute ( so abaxial surface is hidden ) ; flowers pink to rose or purple ; stamens eight , the anthers each with a pair of appendages ; fruits capsules Heather , ling . 40 . Tree ; leaves with evident , pinnate venation and margins not strongly revolute ( so abaxial surface is clearly visible ) ; flowers white ; stamens two , the anthers without appendages ; fruits drupes Olive . 41 . Leaves compound , with three to several leaflets arranged pinnately or twice - pinnately 42 41 . Leaves simple 46 42 . Leaves twice - pinnately compound Mimosa . 42 . Leaves once - pinnately compound or trifoliolate ( i.e . , with three leaflets ) 43 43 . Leaves aromatic , with resin canals ; flowers unisexual ( and staminate and carpellate flowers on different plants ) ; fruits drupes Terebinth . 43 . Leaves not aromatic , without resin canals ; flowers bisexual ; fruits pomes or legumes 44 44 . Leaves pinnately compound ; flowers radially symmetrical ; petals white ; stamens numerous ; ovary inferior , of 2 – 5 fused carpels ; fruit a colorful pome Rowan . 44 . Leaves trifoliolate ( i.e . , with three leaflets ) ; flowers bilaterally symmetrical , like pea - flowers ; petals yellow ; stamens 10 ; ovary superior , a single carpel ; fruit a legume 45 . 45 . Flowers in pendulous racemes ; leaves larger than the flowers Laburnums . 45 . Flowers solitary in leaf axils , on erect branches ; leaves smaller than the flowers Broom . 46 . Leaves minute , scalelike , with salt - excreting glands Tamarisk . 46 . Leaves larger , with an obvious blade , without salt - excreting glands 47 47 . Leaves with entire margins 48 47 . Leaves with serrate , dentate , or crenate margins 56 48 . Bark smooth and snow - white White Tree of Gondor . 48 . Bark smooth to variously roughened and furrowed , brown to gray , but not white 49 49 . Stipules ( i.e . , minute to conspicuous leaflike structures at the nodes , paired at the petiole bases ) present 50 49 . Stipules absent 54 50 . Leaves usually palmately lobed and veined , with mucilage canals ; flowers associated with enlarged bracts Cotton . 50 . Leaves unlobed , pinnately veined , without mucilage canals ; flowers not associated with enlarged bracts 51 51 . Flowers showy , with perianth of green sepals and 4 – 6 white to dark pink petals ; fruits fleshy , colorful 52 51 . Flowers inconspicuous , with perianth absent or of very inconspicuous tepals ; fruits dry , greenish to brown 53 52 . Flowers unisexual , with number of stamens ( or staminodes ) equaling the petals ; style very short or absent ; fruit a drupe with several pits Holly . 52 . Flowers bisexual , with the stamens more numerous than the petals ; style elongate ; fruit a drupe with a single pit Sloe , plums , cherries . 53 . Flowers associated with nectar glands ; both staminate and carpellate flowers in catkins ; fused carpels with numerous ovules ; fruits capsules , opening to release hairy seeds Willows . 53 . Flowers without nectar glands ; only staminate flowers in catkins ; fused carpels with only six ovules and only one of these functional ; fruits nuts , with each nut surrounded by a scaly cuplike structure ( acorn ) Oaks . 54 . Flowers with perianth of 3 – 7 sepals and 3 – 7 fused petals , the corolla more or less urn - shaped and pendulous ; carpels 3 – 8 , fused ; fruits berries Billberry , whortleberry . 54 . Flowers with a perianth of four or six distinct tepals ; fruits drupes 55 55 . Flowers with perianth of four tepals ; carpel one ; drupes black Bay . 55 . Flowers with perianth of six tepals ; drupes red Oiolairë ( one of the Fragrant Trees of Eressëa ) . 56 . Flowers inconspicuous , in catkins or catkinlike clusters ( or at least the staminate flowers in such clusters ) and usually wind pollinated ( except insect pollinated in Willows ) ; petals absent or very inconspicuous 57 56 . Flowers showy , not in catkins , insect - pollinated ; petals evident , conspicuous 64 57 . Leaf teeth with globose , glandular apices ; staminate and carpellate flowers on different plants ; seeds with tuft of hairs 58 57 . Leaf teeth without globose , glandular apices ; flowers bisexual or , if unisexual , then the staminate and carpellate flowers on the same plant ; seeds lacking hair tufts 59 58 . Buds with several bud scales ; flowers not associated with nectar glands , with disk - or cuplike perianth Poplars . 58 . Buds with a single bud scale ; flowers associated with nectar glands , without a perianth Willows . 59 . Leaf base asymmetrical ; flowers bisexual Elms . 59 . Leaf base symmetrical ; flowers unisexual 60 60 . Only the staminate flowers in catkins ; flowers with three fused carpels ; fruits borne in a spiny or scaly cuplike structure ( = cupule ) 61 60 . Both staminate and carpellate flowers in catkins ; flowers with two fused carpels ; fruits associated with bracts , but not in a cuplike structure 62 61 . Fruit an acorn ( i.e . , a solitary nut ) , circular in cross - section , associated with a scaly cuplike structure , without sutures or valves Oaks . 61 . Fruit a pair of nuts , each triangular in cross - section , associated with a four - valved , spiny cuplike structure Beeches . 62 . Fruits nuts ( i.e . , globose , unwinged , and more than 1 cm in diameter ) ; fruits associated with foliaceous bracts Hazels and filberts . 62 . Fruits samaras ( i.e . , flattened , with two - winged or at least two - ridged , and much smaller than above ) ; fruits associated with small bracts 63 63 . Carpellate flowers two per bract complex , and bract complex with five lobes , thickened , woody , and persisting long after release of fruits , thus old conelike carpellate infructescences present on the plant ; twigs with winter buds stalked Alders . 63 . Carpellate flowers usually three per bract complex , and bract complex with three lobes , thinner and not woody , usually deciduous with release of fruits , so old carpellate infructescences not present on the plant ; twigs with winter buds not stalked Birches . 64 . Flowers bilaterally symmetrical , with four colorful and showy tepals ; carpel one Unnamed hollylike tree ( Banksia ) . 64 . Flowers radially symmetrical , with green sepals and showy petals ; carpels one to several ( and then fused ) 65 65 . Petals fused 66 65 . Petals distinct 68 66 . Flowers pendulous ; petals strongly fused , forming a cylindrical , globose , urn - or bell - shaped corolla Billberry , whortleberry . 66 . Flowers not pendulous ; petals only slightly fused , the corolla more or less spreading 67 67 . Flowers unisexual , the staminate ones with 4 – 6 stamens , equaling the number of petals Holly . 67 . Flowers bisexual , with numerous stamens , much exceeding the number of petals Tea ( and Camellia ) . 68 . Petiole more or less winged ; leaves with pellucid dots ( and aromatic citrus odor ) Oranges . 68 . Petiole not winged ; leaves without pellucid dots ( and not aromatic ) 69 69 . Flowers yellow - gold ; lower leaf surface silver ( due to reflective , silky hairs ) , and petiole flattened , thus leaves strongly fluttering Mallorn . 69 . Flowers usually white , pale green , to pink or red , occasionally pale yellowish ; lower leaf surface usually pale green , but occasionally white ( due to dense stellate hairs ) and petiole not flattened , the leaves not strongly fluttering 70 70 . Inflorescence stalk fused to an enlarged and elongated papery bract ; base of the leaves asymmetrical Lindens . 70 . Inflorescence stalk not fused to an enlarged bract ; base of the leaves symmetrical 71 71 . Flowers without a floral cup ( = hypanthium ) Tea ( and Camellia ) . 71 . Flowers with a floral cup ( = hypanthium ) that is nectiferous on its inner surface 72 72 . Fruit a drupe ; flowers with a single carpel , with the ovary superior Sloe , plums , cherries . 72 . Fruit a pome ; flowers usually with 2 – 5 fused carpels , with the ovary inferior 73 73 . Core of pome woody or bony ; fruits 6 – 20 mm in diameter Hawthorns , thorns . 73 . Core of pome cartilaginous ; fruits 20 – 60 mm in diameter Apples , wild apples . KEY 2 : FLOWERING HERBS OF MIDDLE - EARTH 1 . Leaves with parallel venation 2 1 . Leaves with a network of veins , and with the major veins typically pinnate ( i.e . , with a single midvein and smaller veins branching from it ) or palmate ( i.e . , with several prominent and diverging veins ) 15 2 . Flowers showy , with a perianth of petaloid tepals , and attracting various insects as pollinators 3 2 . Flowers inconspicuous , the perianth parts absent or very small , and pollinated by wind 10 3 . Flowers with three stamens ; leaves equitant ( i.e . , in two ranks and with blades flattened in the plane of leaf insertion ) ; ovary inferior Flag - lily , yellow iris . 3 . Flowers with six stamens , plants with leaves variously arranged , but not equitant ; ovary inferior or superior 4 4 . Ovary inferior 5 4 . Ovary superior 6 5 . Flowers with a corona ( i.e . , cup - or trumpetlike , petaloid outgrowth of the perianth ) ; perianth parts yellow or white ; plants blooming in the spring Daffodils . 5 . Flowers without a corona ; perianth parts white , but the inner ones each with a green blotch ; plants blooming in winter Niphredil . 6 . Plants with onion odor ( due to sulfur - containing compounds ) ; flowers in an umbel atop a long scape Onions . 6 . Plants lacking an onion odor ; flowers in various inflorescences or solitary , but if umbellate then not atop a scape 7 7 . Plants from rhizomes Asphodel . 7 . Plants from bulbs 8 8 . Flowers numerous , in racemes ; perianth usually blue or purple , occasionally pink , or white , not spotted ; nectar produced in the septa of the ovary ; capsules with black seeds Hyacinth . 8 . Flowers solitary or few and in racemes or umbels ; perianth orange , red , yellow , pink , or white , spotted or without markings ; nectar produced at the bases of the tepals ; capsules with yellowish , tan , or brown seeds 9 9 . Inflorescences reduced to a solitary flower ; tepals not reflexed , yellow Alfirin and Mallos . 9 . Inflorescences racemose , umbellate , or paniculate , sometimes reduced to a solitary flower ; tepals recurved or reflexed , and orange , red , yellow , pink , or white , often spotted Lilies . 10 . Leaves in three ranks ; stem in cross - section circular to triangular 11 10 . Leaves in two ranks ; stem in cross - section circular to elliptic ( i.e . , the grasses : four species included in the key , although J . R . R . Tolkien’s writings contain numerous other references to unidentified grasses , especially those genera dominating steppes or prairies ) 12 11 . Stems round ; the leaf sheath wrapping around the stem , but the margins not fused , thus sheath said to be “ open ” ; flowers with six small tepals , the bracts various but never flask - shaped ; fruit a capsule Rushes . 11 . Stems more or less triangular ; the leaf sheath fused into a tube around the stem , thus sheath “ closed ” ; flowers lacking tepals , but the carpellate flowers surrounded by a flask - shaped bract ; fruit an achene Sedges . 12 . Inflorescence a panicle 13 12 . Inflorescence a raceme or spike 14 13 . Spikelets with elongated hairs ; leaf blades 2 – 4 cm wide ; plants to 4 m tall Reeds . 13 . Spikelets without elongated hairs ; leaf blades 0.3 – 2 cm wide ; plants shorter , usually to only 1.5 – 3 m tall Salt - marsh grasses , cordgrasses . 14 . Spikelets solitary at each node of the inflorescence axis Wheat . 14 . Spikelets in clusters of three at each node of the inflorescence axis Barley . 15 . Inflorescence a thick , fleshy axis , associated with a demented white bract White Flowers of Morgul Vale . 15 . Inflorescence not as above 16 16 . Leaves two - ranked , composed of a blade and sheath , with flap of tissue ( ligule ) at their junction Cardamon . 16 . Leaves various , but not as above , without a ligule 17 17 . Plants with flowers in dense heads , each of which is surrounded by an involucre of bracts 18 17 . Plants with flowers in various inflorescences , but not in involucrate heads 25 18 . Tissues with milky sap 19 18 . Tissues without milky sap 20 19 . Heads solitary , each on a scape ; leaves oblong to obovate in a basal rosette Dandelion . 19 . Heads clustered and not scapose ; leaves ovate to orbicular , basal and borne along stem Lettuce . 20 . Flowers of head all alike ( and radially symmetrical ) . 21 20 . Flowers of head differentiated , with peripheral ray flowers ( that are bilaterally symmetrical ) and central disk flowers ( that are radially symmetrical ) 22 21 . Leaves with bristle - teeth to spine - teeth ; flowers white , pink , red , purple , or yellow Thistles . 21 . Leaves without spines or bristles ; flowers bright yellow Mugwort . 22 . Ray flowers yellow to orange 23 22 . Ray flowers white , pink , to purple 24 23 . Fruits curved ; plants short , to ca . 80 cm Marigolds . 23 . Fruits compressed and more or less straight ; plants tall , 50 – 400 cm Sunflowers . 24 . Heads clustered in elongated inflorescences ; disk flowers white , pink , to purple Butterbur . 24 . Heads solitary , each atop a scapelike stem ; disk flowers yellow Daisy . 25 . Plants with flowers in compound umbels ; foliage with a resinous odor and petioles sheathing the stems 26 25 . Plants with flowers in various inflorescences , but not in compound umbels ; foliage with odor or not , but not resinous , and petioles not sheathing the stems 30 26 . Fruits covered in rows of hooked or straight bristles ; roots white , yellow , orange , or red Carrots . 26 . Fruits lacking hooked or straight bristles ; roots more or less white 27 27 . Fruits flattened and strongly winged ; leaf sheaths extremely expanded and cuplike Angelica . 27 . Fruits terete or only slightly flattened , not winged , but ridged or unridged ; leaf sheaths more or less expanded but never cuplike 28 28 . Fruits more than twice as long as wide , terminating in a narrowed beak ; the two segments not ridged Wood - parsley . 28 . Fruits less than twice as long as wide , without a beak ; the two segments moderately to strongly ridged 29 29 . Flowers white ; stems reddish spotted ; fruit usually with undulated ribs Hemlock . 29 . Flowers greenish - yellow or yellow ; stems not spotted ; fruit ribs not undulated Parsley . 30 . Plants aquatic , with leaves more or less circular , with a dissection in region where petiole is attached , the blade floating on the water’s surface , with elongated petiole in water column ; each flower on an elongate peduncle ( stalk ) , with numerous petals and stamens Waterlilies . 30 . Plants terrestrial , or if aquatic then not as above 31 31 . Flowers bilaterally symmetrical 32 31 . Flowers radially symmetrical 44 32 . Leaves compound , with three leaflets ; flowers pealike ( i.e . , with uppermost petal a banner , the two lateral petals winged , and two lowermost petals fused and keel - like ; stamens fused by their filaments 33 32 . Leaves simple ; flowers not as above ; stamens not fused 35 33 . Leaflets with entire margins ; flowers with keel petals spirally coiled ; fruits elongated Beans . 33 . Leaflets with clearly to minutely serrate margins ; flowers with keel petals straight ; fruits short 34 34 . Corolla withering but persistent after pollination ; inflorescences headlike or more or less short Clovers . 34 . Corolla deciduous after pollination ; inflorescences slender and elongated Melilot . 35 . Petals distinct 36 35 . Petals fused into a tube , with two petals usually forming an upper lobe and three petals forming a lower lobe of the corolla 38 36 . Petals four ; ovary inferior , comprised of four fused carpels ; seeds with conspicuous hair tufts Fireweed . 36 . Petals five ; ovary superior , composed of three fused carpels ; seeds not hair - tufted 37 37 . Leaves peltate ( i.e . , petiole attached near center of blade ) ; plants pungent , with mustard oils ; flowers with a nectar spur formed by the sepals , with eight stamens ; fruit a schizocarp , separating into three drupe - or nutlike segments Nasturtians . 37 . Leaves not peltate ( i.e . , petiole attached at base of blade ) ; plants not pungent , lacking mustard oils ; flowers with a nectar spur formed by petals and stamens , with five stamens ; fruit a capsule Pansy . 38 . Plant with milky sap ; flowers with a dorsal slit in the corolla ; ovary inferior Lobelia . 38 . Plant without milky sap ; flowers without a dorsal slit in the corolla ; ovary superior 39 39 . Ovary globose , with numerous ovules , with style arising from the apex of the ovary ; fruits capsules , opening by pores ; inflorescences racemes Snapdragons . 39 . Ovary four - lobed , with only four ovules , with style arising out of a depression in the middle of the four - lobed ovary ; fruits four nutlets ; inflorescences are pairs of reduced cymes , forming pseudo - whorls to spicate clusters 40 40 . Corolla strongly two - lipped , the upper lip more or less concave ; stamens two , each anther with a much - expanded connective , so the two halves of the anther are widely separated Sages . 40 . Corolla two - lipped to nearly radial , the lips only weakly differentiated , the upper lip more or less flat ; stamens four , each anther with connective not or only slightly expanded 41 41 . Corolla nearly radially symmetrical , seemingly four - lobed , but the wider upper lobe actually two fused petals Mentha . 41 . Corolla distinctly two - lipped 42 42 . Inflorescences densely spicate ( due to clustering of the pseudo - whorls of flowers ) , raised above the leafy part of the plant ; flowers purple or blue Lavender . 42 . Inflorescences not densely spicate and flowers in obvious and well - separated pseudo - whorls on distal portion of branches ; flowers white to rose or purple 43 43 . Calyx radial ; flowers bisexual Marjoram . 43 . Calyx two - lipped ; flowers bisexual and carpellate Thyme . 44 . Petals or tepals fused 45 44 . Petals or tepals distinct 54 45 . Leaves pinnately or twice pinnately compound 46 45 . Leaves simple 47 46 . Leaves twice - pinnately compound , all leaflets the same size ( i.e . , all minute ) ; flowers with stamens much more conspicuous than the corolla , and the white , pink , or lavender stamens not contrasting in color with the petals ; stipules present ; fruits legumes ; plants without tubers Mimosa . 46 . Leaves pinnately compound with leaflets very divergent in size ( i.e . , some large and other small ) ; flowers with stamens and corolla equally conspicuous , and the stamens yellow , contrasting with the white petals ; stipules absent ; fruits berries ; plants producing tubers Potatoes . 47 . Leaves opposite and decussate 48 47 . Leaves alternate and spirally arranged 49 48 . Petals yellow or occasionally silver ( and sometimes having both colors ) Elanor . 48 . Petals white , pink , red , orange , or blue Pimpernel . 49 . Flowers with four - lobed ovary , the style arising out of depression in center of lobed ovary ; inflorescences one - sided cymes 50 49 . Flowers with more or less globose ovary , the style arising from the ovary apex ; inflorescences various , but not one - sided cymes 51 50 . Plant aromatic ; leaves large , hoary ( densely hairy ) ; flowers nodding , without five short scales … Kingsfoil . 50 . Plant not aromatic ; leaves smaller , not hoary ; flowers more or less erect , with throat obstructed by five short scales Forget - me - nots . 51 . Carpels four or five 52 51 . Carpels two 53 52 . Ovary , in cross - section with a single basal ovule ; leaves with only midvein evident Thrift . 52 . Ovary in cross - section with numerous ovules on a central axis ; leaves with obvious pinnate venation Primeroles , primroses . 53 . Inflorescences terminal ; corolla with tube white and the lobes pink to rose ; fruits brown capsules ; leaves can be smoked Pipe - weed , tobacco . 53 . Inflorescences axillary ; corolla purple ; fruits black berries ; leaves are not smoked Belladonna . 54 . Flowers with distinct carpels ( and thus with several ovule - bearing structures in the center of the flower ) 55 54 . Flowers with fused carpels ( thus only a single ovule - bearing structure in the center of the flower ) or only a single carpel 63 55 . Leaves succulent Seregon and stonecrops . 55 . Leaves thin and herbaceous 56 56 . Leaves and stems with sharp - pointed prickles 57 56 . Leaves and stems without prickles 58 57 . Flower with floral cup ( = hypanthium ) urn - shaped ; fruits dry and hard ( achenes ) , surrounded by orange to red fleshy cuplike structure ( i.e . , forming a rose hip ) Roses . 57 . Flower with floral cup flat ; fruits fleshy , red or black ( druplets ) , exposed Blackberries , raspberries , brambles . 58 . Stipules present ; flowers with a floral cup ( = hypanthium ) ; floral receptacle expanding as fruits develop , forming a fleshy , red structure on which the fruits ( achenes ) are borne Strawberries . 58 . Stipules absent ; flowers without a hypanthium ; floral receptacle neither expanding nor becoming fleshy ; fruits achenes or follicles 59 59 . Leaves opposite Clematis . 59 . Leaves alternate ( but pair of bracts below inflorescence may be opposite ) 60 60 . Flowers with 3 – 5 sepals and five to numerous petals 61 60 . Flowers with four to numerous tepals 62 61 . Petals lacking nectar glands , white to pink or red , purple , or yellow ; fruits follicles Peony . 61 . Petals with basal nectar glands , usually yellow ; fruits achenes Buttercups . 62 . Herb blooming throughout the year ; tepals white Evermind . 62 . Herb blooming only in the spring ; tepals white , red , blue , purple , green , or yellow Anemones . 63 . Leaves opposite 64 63 . Leaves alternate 68 64 . Flowers wind - pollinated ; perianth of tepals , inconspicuous 65 64 . Flowers insect - pollinated ; perianth of sepals and petals , the petals showy , colorful 66 65 . Leaves palmately compound ; carpellate flowers with two styles and stigmas ( so two carpellate ) Hemp . 65 . Leaves simple ; carpellate flowers with a single brush - like stigma ( and seeming to be a single carpel , but actually two ) Nettles . 66 . Calyx with distinct sepals , with two small sepals and three larger ones ; petals usually yellow , the margin entire ; stamens numerous Rockroses . 66 . Calyx with fused sepals , all the same size ; petals white to red or purple , apically notched or fringed ; stamens 10 67 67 . Styles three ; petals with a pair of appendages at the junction of the narrow base and the spreading blade Campion . 67 . Styles two ; petals lacking a pair of appendages Gilly , gillyflower . 68 . Plant with white , yellow , orange , or red sap ( latex ) ; flowers with two quickly deciduous sepals and four wrinkled petals 69 68 . Plant without latex ( or sap merely clear ) ; flowers not as above , with four or five sepals and the same number of petals , or with six tepals ( and then the inner larger than the outer ) , the petals not wrinkled 70 69 . Carpels two ; petals yellow Celandine . 69 . Carpels three or more ; petals pink to red or lilac , orange , or yellow Poppy . 70 . Each node of the stem with ocrea ( i.e . , cylindrical fused stipules ) surrounding the stem ; flowers with six tepals , the inner three larger than the outer ones Sorrel . 70 . Each node of the stem with or without stipules , but if present , then not as above ; flowers usually with four or five sepals and petals ( but 3 – 5 tepals in Amaranth ) 71 71 . Leaves twice - pinnately compound Mimosa . 71 . Leaves simple to once - pinnately compound 72 72 . Flowers with a perianth of 3 – 5 tepals Amaranth . 72 . Flowers with a perianth of four or five sepals and four or five petals 73 73 . Flowers with five petals 74 73 . Flowers with four petals 76 74 . Stamens 5 or 10 , with each anther opening by two slits ; tissues without mucilage canals ; sepals distinct 75 74 . Stamens numerous , with each anther opening by a single slit ; tissues with mucilage canals ( slime ) ; sepals connate Malva . 75 . Flowers with five stamens ; leaves narrow , with only three visible veins Flax . 75 . Flowers with 10 stamens ; leaves broader , with numerous visible veins in a pinnate or palmate arrangement Saxifrages . 76 . Flowers white ; basal leaves more or less pinnately compound Cress , watercress . 76 . Flowers yellow ; basal leaves simple to pinnately compound 77 77 . Petals usually 18 – 25 mm long ; terminal segments of fruits 4 – 11 mm long ; cultivated form without fleshy roots , but with apical , globose head formed by overlapping leaves Cabbage . 77 . Petals usually 6 – 11 mm long ; terminal segments of fruits 8 – 22 mm long ; cultivated form with fleshy taproot , but stem lacking globose head formed by overlapping leaves Turnips .