Telperion and Laurelin The Two Trees of Valinor Under her song the saplings grew and became fair and tall , and came to flower ; and thus there awoke in the world the Two Trees of Valinor . Of all things which Yavanna made they have most renown , and about their fate all the tales of the Elder Days are woven . The one had leaves of dark green that beneath were as shining silver , and from each of his countless flowers a dew of silver light was ever falling , and the earth beneath was dappled with the shadows of his fluttering leaves . The other bore leaves of a young green like the new - opened beech ; their edges were of glittering gold . Flowers swung upon her branches in clusters of yellow flame , formed each to a glowing horn that spilled a golden rain upon the ground ; and from the blossom of that tree there came forth warmth and a great light . Telperion the one was called in Valinor … but Laurelin the other was … and many names in song beside . ( SILM 1 ) . IN THE DEPTHS OF TIME , THE TWO TREES OF VALINOR , TELPERION AND Laurelin , were sung into existence by Yavanna , one of the Queens of the Valar and a lover of all growing things ( Figure 6.1 ) . The trees provided light to the realm of Valinor — the land of these Powers . Telperion flowered alone for the first six hours of each day , and during the seventh hour his silver light mingled with the golden light of Laurelin . She blossomed during the latter half of the 12 - hour Valien day , and , at the end of her blossoming period , her light again mingled with the regenerating light of Telperion . Thus , twice each day , there was a precious period of mingled gold and silver light . During the time of the Two Trees , Middle - earth lay in near darkness , lit only by starlight , as the light of the Two Trees was restricted to the vicinity of Valinor . This light was produced by the trees ’ flowers — almost as if it were nectar — and was gathered in shining lakes , illuminating all of Valinor . After the awakening of the Elves , the Valar summoned them to Valinor , “ there to be gathered at the knees of the Powers in the light of the Trees , ” although Ulmo spoke against this decision , stating that they should be left free “ to walk as they would in Middle - earth , and with their gifts of skill to order all the lands and heal their hurts ” ( SILM 3 ) . Thus , Ingwë , Finwë , and Elwë were brought as ambassadors to Valinor . They were filled with awe at the sight of the Valar and “ greatly desired the light and splendor of the Trees ” ( SILM 3 ) . Returning to Cuiviénen , they spoke to their people , urging them to heed the summons — and thus began the long migration of the three hosts into the west . Eventually , the people of Ingwë , Finwë , and Elwë became , respectively , the Vanyar ( the Fair Elves ) , Noldor ( the Deep Elves , in the sense of possessing great knowledge ) , and Teleri ( the Last - comers , as this host arrived last in Valinor , and , in fact , many of the Teleri [ e.g . , the Sindar and Nandor ] never left Middle - earth ) . The Calaquendi ( i.e . , the elves who reached Valinor and had seen the holy light of the Two Trees ) much surpassed the Dark Elves ( i.e . , those who had remained behind in Middle - earth ) in wisdom , skill , and beauty . The bliss of Valinor lasted while the trees lived . Tragically , however , they were killed by Morgoth and the spider - like Ungoliant , and , after their death , their holy light remained only in the light of the Silmarils ( which had been fashioned by the elf Fëanor , see Figure 6.1 ) and in the light of some of the brighter stars . Yavanna , through her singing , and Nienna , through her tears , sought to heal the trees , but they did not succeed . Yet their efforts caused Telperion , at last , to bear one great , silver flower , and Laurelin to produce a single golden fruit — and ( as related in the myths of the Noldor ) from these the Valar fashioned the moon and sun in order to bring light to all of Middle - earth . It is important to remember that during the Third Age the unsullied light of the Two Trees ( i.e . , light produced before they were attacked by Morgoth ) only survived in Eärendil’s star — arising from the Silmaril in his possession — which had been recovered from Morgoth by Beren and Lúthien . A small portion of this light was caught in the phial of Galadriel , which she gave to Frodo , to be a light in dark places — “ when all other lights go out ” ( LotR 2 : VIII ) . Thus , we see that the light of the Two Trees is more than a memory , but is an ongoing force within Arda — a holy light , which contributed to the success of Frodo’s quest and that can still be seen in the morning star . FIGURE 6.1 Fëanor and the Two Trees of Valinor . How shall we imagine these two holy trees — the greatest of the works of Yavanna , the Giver of Fruits ? Telperion was the most beloved by the elves , and Yavanna made an image or copy of the Elder Tree for the elves of Tirion ; this image of Telperion was called Galathilion . It grew in the courtyard beside the Tower of Ingwë and was identical to Telperion in every way — except that it did not produce its own light . Galathilion was the ancestor of the long lineage of White Trees , ending in the various White Trees of Gondor . Thus , a living image of Telperion survived into the Third and Fourth Ages ( see the White Tree of Gondor , in Chapter 7 , for a detailed description of this tree ) . No comparable image of Laurelin survived the attack by Morgoth and Ungoliant . The description and illustration of Laurelin ( see Figure 6.2 ) presented here is based on J . R . R . Tolkien’s description ( see initial quote ) and thus assumes some artistic and botanical license . It is clear that Telperion and Laurelin are not based , in any simple way , on any currently existing flowering tree . However , the white flowers of Telperion are said to resemble those of a cherry ( Prunus , a genus of Rosaceae ; see HoM - E Vol . 5 , Part 2 : VI , p . 209 ) , while the hanging clusters of yellow flowers of Laurelin are clearly reminiscent of those of the golden - chain tree ( Laburnum , a genus of legumes , the Fabaceae or Leguminosae ) . In fact , in the original Quenta Silmarillion ( see HoM - E Vol . 5 , Part 2 : VI , p . 209 ) , it is stated that the hanging clusters of yellow flowers of Laurelin were like the hanging blossoms of “ those trees Men now call Golden - rain ” — a common name usually applied to Koelreuteria ( especially the species K . paniculata and K . elegans , of the Sapindaceae ) . However , the yellow - flowered inflorescences of Koelreuteria are erect , not hanging . It is thus more likely that Tolkien was thinking of Laburnum , and these species are occasionally also called golden - rain trees ( instead of the more commonly used golden - chain ) . Yet it would be a mistake to think that Telperion was a merely species of Prunus and Laurelin a species of Laburnum . The flowers of Galathilion ( i.e . , Sindarin for “ Radiant - Holy - Moon ” ) were moonlike in shape , implying that their petals were at least slightly fused — not distinct from each other as in cherries . Likewise , the flowers of Laurelin are described as horn - shaped , spilling “ golden rain upon the ground ” ( SILM 1 ) . This , likewise , implies that their petals were fused , allowing the horn - like corollas to hold light as if it were nectar , as shown in the beautiful illustration by Roger Garland ( http : / / www.theonering.com / galleries / professional - artists / the - silmarillion / two - trees - of - valilnor - roger - garland ) . The form of the flowers of both Telperion and Laurelin , therefore , are more in line with that of members of the asterid clade ( i.e . , Asteridae or Sympetalae ) , a group of flowering plants that is characterized by flowers with fused petals , forming various tubular or bell - shaped corollas . Thus , we have shown the flowers of both trees as having fused petals . Those of Telperion are reminiscent of some Ericales , while those of Laurelin are similar to many Lamiales , and especially some Bignoniaceae ( e.g . , Tecoma stans ) . It would have been overly simplistic to visualize the flowers of Laurelin as having the form of pea - flowers ( as would be appropriate for Laburnum , a member of the Fabaceae , a group with separate petals ) or the flowers of Telperion merely as five - petaled and with a floral cup ( as would be appropriate for Prunus , of the Rosaceae , another group with distinct petals ) . The leaves of Telperion and Laurelin seem to draw upon yet other trees . Those of Telperion are said to be silver beneath , and such leaves , for example , are characteristic of some Elaeagnaceae ( e.g . , Shepherdia or some species of Elaeagnus , which have silver peltate - scales covering the lower surface ) or Sapotaceae ( e.g . , species of Chrysophyllum , which have dense , T - shaped , silver or gold hairs covering the lower surface ) . They are also said to tremble , as is characteristic of the leaves of many species of Populus ( of the Salicaceae ) or the leaflets of Schefflera tremula ( Araliaceae ) , among others . The leaves of Laurelin are compared with newly opened beech leaves ( i.e . , Fagus , Fagaceae ) , and thus we assume that they were simple ( i.e . , each leaf with a single blade ) , not pinnately compound ( i.e . , with several leaflets ) as in Laburnum or Koelreuteria . It is clear that , in Laurelin and Telperion , we see elements of several species pulled together in unconventional , yet lovely combinations . Each of the Two Trees is unique , existing only in Tolkien’s legendarium and representing beautiful elements drawn from a diverse array of flowering plants .The Two Trees are central in the mythology of Middle - earth , as stated in the Silmarillion : “ about their fate all the tales of the Elder Days are woven ” ( SILM 1 ) . It is not really surprising that the fate of Telperion and Laurelin is at the center of Tolkien’s legendarium because trees are frequently of great religious and / or mythological significance . Many examples could be cited , but we will mention only a few here . Two trees are an essential part of the story of Adam and Eve ( see Genesis : chapters 2 and 3 ) : the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil and the Tree of Life . Another , quite different mythological vision of two trees is that found in the fourth chapter of Zechariah , where the prophet saw two olive trees ( Olea europaea ) , one on each side of a golden lampstand , representing Joshua ( the high priest ) and Zerubbabel ( the political ruler ) and the power and grace needed to accomplish the rebuilding of the temple . In Egyptian mythology , two sycamore - figs ( Ficus sycomorus ) stood at the eastern gate of the heavens through which Ra emerged every morning , and these represented the Tree of Life . Another example is the World Tree , Yagdrasil , possibly identified with an ash ( Fraxinus ; see also Watts , 2007 ) , of Norse mythology , which extended from the heavens to the underworld . Trees have been considered sacred in many religions , often symbolizing strength , splendor , immortality , and / or growth and fertility , and worship frequently occurred in sacred groves ( e.g . , in the ancient religions of Greece and Rome , the Middle East , or of the Celts , Druids , and other peoples of northern Europe ) . This connection of trees ( and especially oaks , i.e . , Quercus spp . ) with the divine is seen , for example , in the Hebrew words for oak ( i.e . , allon and elon ) both of which are associated with the word for “ god ” — el . It is perhaps significant that Joshua erected a stone beneath an oak when he and his people renewed their covenant with the Lord . Oaks were sacred in the religions of the ancient peoples of Greece ( where they were associated with Zeus ) , the Baltic region ( associated with Perkons , a god of thunder ) , the Scandinavian region ( where they were associated with Thor , another thunder god ) , and various Celtic groups ( where oaks , again , were associated with thunder gods ) . This connection may result from the fact that long - lived oaks are frequently hit by , but survive , lightning strikes . Finally , we have in Tolkien’s mythology the connection of trees and light . Light is almost universally of religious significance and is symbolically connected with the divine . Thus , we see in the Silmarillion that the silver and golden light of the Two Trees is holy , and those who live in their light are transformed — the Calaquendi , for example , have gained skills and knowledge far above those of the Dark elves who had refused the summons . Even the “ opening eyes of Men ” ( SILM 12 ) were first turned toward the rising of the sun — second - hand light , derived from the Two Trees — in the West . 1 The first humans to enter Beleriand did so because they had heard that there was “ Light in the West ” ( see SILM 17 ) , but unfortunately , instead they found before them Morgoth , the Lord of the Dark and killer of the Two Trees . The Quenya name Telperion is derived from the Telerin telpë ( meaning silver ) ; the meaning of - rion is unclear but may be a masculine name suffix . An English translation of the name is unclear , but perhaps Silver Tree is the most appropriate ( as glossed in the index of the 50th anniversary edition of the Lord of the Rings ) . In Hammond and Scull’s The Lord of the Rings : A Reader’s Companion ( see p . 637 ) , the suggested translation is “ ? silver - white . ” Telperion is also given the name Silpion ( from the Quenya element sil meaning white , and thus White Tree ) and Ninquelótë ( from the Quenya ninquë , meaning white , and lótë , meaning flower ) . The Sindarin equivalent of the latter is Nimloth . The Quenya name Laurelin may mean either singing - gold ( if based on the stem laurelind - ) or hanging - gold ( if based on the stem laureling - ) . Alternative names for this tree are the Quenya Culúrien , based on the stem kul - ( meaning golden - red , so perhaps meaning Tree of Gold ) , and Malinalda , based on malina ( yellow or golden ) and alda ( tree ) . DESCRIPTION OF TELPERION See description of the White Tree of Gondor ( Chapter 7 ) , which was similar to Telperion in every way except that the flowers of the White Trees did not produce their own light . DESCRIPTION OF LAURELIN Tree with erect branches ; the leaves alternate and spirally arranged , simple , ovate to elliptic , with pinnate venation , the base and apex acute , the margin entire ; stipules absent . The inflorescences axillary racemes ; flowers bisexual , bilaterally symmetrical , with five sepals , five connate petals , forming a hornlike , yellow corolla , with two upper lobes and three lower lobes , perhaps four stamens , and two fused carpels , with a superior ovary . Fruits berries , globose and yellow . 1 According to J . R . R . Tolkien’s mythology ( as related in Chapter 11 of The Silmarillion ) both the moon and the sun , after they were fashioned in Valinor , first arose in the west , although later Varda commanded that they rise in the east . She also established their current movements , allowing a time of shadow and half - light in Middle - earth .